Another pass over the `style` chapter (#130)
pavpanchekha/emberfox: book/styles.md

next: chrome
...

So far, each HTML element's appearance has been hard-coded into our
browser. But web pages should be able to override our style decisions
and take on a unique character. This is done via _Cascading Style
Sheets_, a simple styling language for web authors (and, as we'll see,
browser developers) to define how a web page ought to look.

The style attribute
===================

In the [last chapter](layout.md), we gave each `pre` element a gray
background. It looks OK, and it *is* good to have some defaults, but
you can imagine a site wanting a say in how it looks.

The `style` attribute is the simplest way to override browser styles.
It looks like this:

``` {.example}
<div style="background-color:lightblue"></div>
```

This `<div>` element's `style` attribute contains a property/value
pair matching the property `background-color` to the value
`lightblue`.^[CSS allows spaces around the punctuation, but our
simplistic attribute parser does not support that.] Multiple
property/value pairs, separated by semicolons, are also allowed. The
browser looks at those property-value pairs when painting the element;

> this way the `style` attribute allows web page authors to override the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this allows web page authors to override the
```

        # ...
```

> Put the exact same lines of code inside `InlineLayout` as well, so

Reviewer: Your code above uses a static method and brand checking on class names instead...

Author: Note sure what you mean here.

Reviewer: Looks like my comment is outdated anyway, so disregard.

it's a pain---you need to set a `style` attribute on each element, and
if you change the style that's a lot of attributes to edit. In the
early days of the web,^[I'm talking Netscape 3. The late 90s.] the
element-by-element approach was all there was. CSS was invented to
improve on this state of affairs:

- One CSS file can consistently style many web pages at once
- One line of CSS can consistently style many elements at once
- CSS is future-proof and supports browsers with different features

To achieve these goals, CSS extends the key-value `style` attribute
with two related ideas: *selectors* and *cascading*. Selectors
describe which HTML elements a list of property/value pairs apply
to:[^media-queries]

[^media-queries]: CSS rules can also be guarded by "media queries",
    which say that a rule should apply only in certain browsing
    environments (like only on mobile or only in landscape mode).
    Media queries are super-important for building sites that work
    across many devices (try this book on mobile!).

``` {.css}
selector { property-1: value-1; property-2: value-2; }
```

Since one of these *rules* can apply to many elements, it's possible

> for several blocks to apply to the same element. So browsers have a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for several rules to apply to the same element. So browsers have a
```

```

Skipping parse errors is a double-edged sword. It hides error
messages, making it harder for authors to debug their style sheets; it
also makes it harder to debug your parser.[^try-no-try] So in most
programming situations this "catch-all" error handling is a code
smell.

[^try-no-try]: I suggest removing the `try` block when debugging.

> But "catch-all" error handling has an unusual benefit on the web . The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But "catch-all" error handling has an unusual benefit on the web. The
```

    parentheses.

We'll have a class for each type of selector to store the
selector's contents, like the tag name for a tag selector:

``` {.python}
class TagSelector:
    def __init__(self, tag):
        self.tag = tag
```

Each selector class will also test whether the selector matches an
element:
        
``` {.python}
    def matches(self, node):
        return isinstance(node, Element) and self.tag == node.tag
```

A descendant selector works similarly. It has two parts, which are
both themselves selectors:

``` {.python}
class DescendantSelector:
    def __init__(self, ancestor, descendant):
        self.ancestor = ancestor
        self.descendant = descendant
```

Then the `match` method is recursive:

``` {.python}
class DescendantSelector:
    def matches(self, node):
        if not self.descendant.matches(node): return False
        while node.parent:
            if self.ancestor.matches(node.parent): return True
            node = node.parent
        return False
```

Now, to create these selector objects, we need a parser. In this case,
that's just another parsing function:[^not-quite-word]

[^not-quite-word]: Once again, using `word` here for tag names is

> actually not quite right, but it is close enough. One tricky side

Reviewer: ```suggestion
actually not quite right, but it's close enough. One tricky side
```

    return prop.lower(), val
```

This combines `word`, `whitespace`, and `literal` into a more
complicated parsing function. And note that if `i` does not actually
point to a property-value pair, one of the `word` calls or the
`literal` call will fail.

Sometimes we need to call these parsing functions in a loop. For
example, a sequence of property-value pairs looks like this:

``` {.python indent=8}
def body(self):
    pairs = {}
    while self.i < len(self.s) and self.s[self.i] != "}":
        prop, val = self.pair()
        pairs[prop] = val
        self.whitespace()
        self.literal(";")
        self.whitespace()
    return pairs
```

> One twist to parsing functions is handling errors. So for example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One twist to parsing functions is handling errors. For example,
`

        return False
```

When a rule applies to an element, the browser needs to add its
property-value pairs to the element's `style`. The logic is pretty
simple: we add a `rules` argument to the `style` function and copy
property/value pairs from matching rules:

``` {.python replace==%20value/=%20computed_value}
def style(node, rules):
    # ...
    for selector, body in rules:
        if not selector.matches(node): continue
        for property, value in body.items():
            node.style[property] = value
```

Put this loop before the one that parses the `style` attribute: the
attribute takes priority over style sheets.

Since two rules can apply to the same element, rule order matters. In
CSS, the correct order is called *cascade order*, and it is based on
the rule's selector. Tag selectors get the lowest priority; class

> selectors one higher; and id selectors higher still. Since we only

Reviewer: Also note here that order of declaration is a tie breaker.

it'll be a lot easier to read. Don't neglect debugging niceties like
this!

[^show-context]: It can be especially helpful to print, say, the 20
characters around index `i` from the string.

::: {.further}
A parser receives arbitrary bytes as input, so parser bugs are usually
easy for bad actors to exploit. Parser correctness is thus crucial to
browser security, as [many][bug-1] [parser][bug-2] [bugs][bug-3] have
demonstrated. Nowadays browser developers use [fuzzing] to try to find
and fix such bugs.
:::

> [bug-1]: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2010-3971

Reviewer: Curious: are these particularly well-known vulnerabilities?

Author: I searched the CVE database—perhaps more recent bugs also exist but don't get CVEs for some reason? It would be nice to link to more recent and more prominent bugs when possible.

[bug-2]: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2007-0943
[bug-3]: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2010-1663
[fuzzing]: https://hacks.mozilla.org/2021/02/browser-fuzzing-at-mozilla/

Applying style sheets
=====================

With the parser debugged, the next step is applying the parsed style
sheet to the web page. Since each CSS rule can style many elements on
the page, this will require looping over all elements *and* all rules.

> When a rule applies its property/values pairs are copied to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a rule applies, its property/values pairs are copied to the
```

```

Make sure to put this loop before the one that parses the `style`
attribute: the `style` attribute should override style sheet values.

To try this out, we'll need a style sheet. Every browser ships with a
*browser style sheet*,[^technically-ua] which defines its default
styling for the various HTML elements. For our browser, it might look
like this:

[^technically-ua]: Technically called a "User Agent" style sheet. User Agent,
    [like the Memex](history.md).

``` {.css}
pre { background-color: gray; }
```

Let's store that in a new file, `browser.css`, and have our browser
read it when it starts:

``` {.python replace=browser.css/browser6.css}
class Browser:
    def __init__(self):
        # ...
        with open("browser6.css") as f:
            self.default_style_sheet = CSSParser(f.read()).parse()
```

Now, when the browser loads a web page, it can apply that default
style sheet to set up its default styling for each element:

``` {.python indent=8 expected=False}
def load(self, url):
    # ...
    rules = self.default_style_sheet.copy()
    style(nodes, rules)
    # ...
```

The browser style sheet is the default for the whole web. But each web

> sites can also use CSS to set a consistent style for the whole site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
site can also use CSS to set a consistent style for the whole site.
```

> To do that, the web site posts a CSS file and references it from each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do that, the web site references CSS files and references them from each
```

> page using a `link` element:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
page using `link` elements:
```

        self.priority = ancestor.priority + descendant.priority
```

Then the cascade order for rules is just those priorities:

``` {.python}
def cascade_priority(rule):
    selector, body = rule
    return selector.priority
```

Put it all together, and we can call `style` from the browser's `load`
method like this:

``` {.python indent=8}
def load(self, url):
    # ...
    nodes = HTMLParser(body).parse()

    # ... download rules
    style(nodes, sorted(rules, cascade_priority))

    self.document = DocumentLayout(nodes)
    # ...
```

Note that Python's `sorted` function keeps the relative order of

> things when possible. This means that in general, a rule that comes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
things when possible. This ensures that a rule that comes
```

later in the CSS file comes later in cascade order, unless the

> selectors used force something different. That's how real browsers do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
selectors used force something different.
```

> it, too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    elif url.startswith("/"):
        scheme, hostpath = current.split("://", 1)
        host, oldpath = hostpath.split("/", 1)
        return scheme + "://" + host + url
    else:
        dir, _ = current.rsplit("/", 1)
        while url.startswith("../"):
            url = url[3:]
            if dir.count("/") == 2: continue
            dir, _ = dir.rsplit("/", 1)
        return dir + "/" + url
```

When resolving path-relative URLs, we count the number of slashes in
the "directory" to make sure we never strip off the scheme and host
name.

Now the browser can request each linked style sheet and add its rules
to the `rules` list:

``` {.python indent=4}
def load(self, url):
    # ...
    for link in links:
        try:
            header, body = request(relative_url(link, url))
        except:
            continue
        rules.extend(CSSParser(body).parse())
```

The `try`/`except` ignores style sheets that fail to download, but it

> can also hide bugs in your, so if something's not right try removing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can also hide bugs in your code, so if something's not right try removing
```

so just putting them first works well enough. But if the browser style sheet
had any descendant selectors, we'd encounter bugs.

Cascading
=========

A web page can now have any number of stylesheets applied to it. And
since two rules can apply to the same element, rule order matters: it
determines which rules take priority, and when one rule overrides
another.

In CSS, the correct order is called *cascade order*, and it is based
on the rule's selector, with file order as a tie breaker. This system
allows more specific rules to override more general ones, so that you
can have a browser style sheet, a site-wide style sheet, and maybe a

> special style sheet for your about page, all co-existing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
special style sheet for your specific web page, all co-existing.
```

Since our browser only has tag selectors, our cascade order just
counts them:

``` {.python}
class TagSelector:
    def __init__(self, tag):
        # ...
        self.priority = 1

class DescendantSelector:
    def __init__(self, ancestor, descendant):
        # ...
        self.priority = ancestor.priority + descendant.priority
```

Then our cascade order for rules is just those priorities:

``` {.python}
def cascade_priority(rule):
    selector, body = rule
    return selector.priority
```

Now when we call `style`, we need to sort the rules, like this:

``` {.python indent=4}
def load(self, url):
    # ...
    style(nodes, sorted(rules, key=cascade_priority))
    # ...
```

Note that before sorting `rules`, it as in file order. Since Python's
`sorted` function keeps the relative order of things when possible,
file order thus acts as a tie breaker, as it should.

That's it: we've added CSS to our web browser! I mean---for background

> colors. But there's more to web design than that! At the very least,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
colors. But there's more to web design than that. At the very least,
```

`font-weight` (`normal` or `bold`), `font-style` (`normal` or
`italic`), and `font-size` (a length or percentage).

Let's start by listing our inherited properties and their default
values:

``` {.python}
INHERITED_PROPERTIES = {
    "font-size": "16px",
    "font-style": "normal",
    "font-weight": "normal",
    "color": "black",
}
```

We'll then add the actual inheritance code to the `style` function. It
has to come *before* the other loops, since explicit rules should
override inheritance:

``` {.python}
def style(node, rules):
    # ...
    for property, default in INHERITED_PROPERTIES.items():
        if node.parent:
            node.style[property] = node.parent.style[property]
        else:
            node.style[property] = default
    # ...
```

Inheriting font size comes with a twist. Web pages can use percentages
as font sizes: `h1 { font-size: 150% }` makes headings 50% bigger than
surrounding text. But what if you had, say, a `code` element inside an
`h1` tag---would that inherit the `150%` value for `font-size`? Surely
it shouldn't be another 50% bigger than the rest of the heading text?

So, in fact, browsers resolve percentages to absolute pixel units

> before storing them in the `style`; it's called a ["computed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
before storing them in the `style` and inheriting them to descendants; it's called a ["computed
```

style"][^css-computed]. Of the properties our toy browser supports,
only `font-size` needs to be computed in this way:

[^css-computed]: Full CSS is a bit more confusing: there are
[specified, computed, used, and actual values][css-computed], and they
affect lots of CSS properties besides `font-size`. We're just not
implementing those other properties in this book.

[css-computed]: https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/cascade.html#value-stages

``` {.python}
def compute_style(node, property, value):
    if property == "font-size":
        if value.endswith("px"):
            return value
        elif value.endswith("%"):
            # ...
        else:
            return None
    else:
        return value
```

> The case for percentage sizes has to handle a tricky edge case:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Percentage font sizing also has to handle a tricky edge case:
```

[^why-parse]: This code has to parse and unparse font sizes because
    our `style` field stores strings; in a real browser the computed
    style is stored parsed so this doesn't have to happen.

``` {.python indent=12}
if node.parent:
    parent_font_size = node.parent.style["font-size"]
else:
    parent_font_size = INHERITED_PROPERTIES["font-size"]
node_pct = float(value[:-1]) / 100
parent_px = float(parent_font_size[:-2])
return str(node_pct * parent_px) + "px"
```

Now `style` can call `computed_style` any time it reads a property
value out of a style sheet:

``` {.python}
def style(node, rules):
    # ...
    for selector, body in rules:
        if not selector.matches(node): continue
        for property, value in body.items():
            computed_value = compute_style(node, property, value)
            if not computed_value: continue
            node.style[property] = computed_value
    # ...
```

The loop that handles `style` attributes should likewise call
`computed_style`. Note that because the `style` function recurses at
the end of the function, the node's parent already has a `font-size`
value stored when `compute_style` is called.

> ::: {.further}

Reviewer: remove - empty

Author: I'm going to fill the two empty ones in with something interesting. Open to suggestions—thinking of talking about rule trees in the "Inheritance" section and promoting the long footnote on pixels v points to the "Font Properties" go further block.

Reviewer: https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:third_party/blink/renderer/core/css/style-calculation.md doesn't have much..

            node.style[property] = node.parent.style[property]
        else:
            node.style[property] = default
    # ...
```

Inheriting font size comes with a twist. Web pages can use percentages
as font sizes: `h1 { font-size: 150% }` makes headings 50% bigger than
normal text. But what if you had, say, a `code` element inside an `h1`
tag---would that inherit the `150%` value for `font-size`? Would it be
another 50% bigger than the rest of the heading text? That seems
wrong. So in fact, browsers resolve percentages to absolute pixel
units before storing them in the `style`; it's called
["computing"][^css-computed] the style.

[^css-computed]: Full CSS is a bit more confusing: there are
[specified, computed, used, and actual values][css-computed], and they
affect lots of CSS properties besides `font-size`. We're just
implementing those other properties in this book.

[css-computed]: https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/cascade.html#value-stages

In our browser, only `font-size` needs to be computed in this way, so
the code looks like this:

``` {.python}
def compute_style(node, property, value):
    if property == "font-size":
        # ...
    else:
        return value
```

> Compute `font-size` values works differently for pixel and percentages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Computing `font-size` values works differently for pixel and percentage
```

values:

``` {.python indent=8}
if value.endswith("px"):
    return value
elif value.endswith("%"):
    if node.parent:
        parent_px = float(node.parent.style["font-size"][:-2])
    else:

>         parent_px = 16

Reviewer: factor 16 into a global static constant

        display_list.append(DrawText(x, y, word, font, color))
```

`DrawText` now needs a `color` argument, and needs to pass it to
`create_text`'s `fill` parameter:

``` {.python}
class DrawText:
    def __init__(self, x1, y1, text, font, color):
        # ...
        self.color = color

    def execute(self, scroll, canvas):
        canvas.create_text(
            # ...
            fill=self.color,
        )
```

Phew! That was a lot of coordinated changes, so test everything and
make sure it works. You should now see links on this page appear in

> blue---and you'll might also notice that the rest of the text has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blue---and you might also notice that the rest of the text has
```

become slightly lighter.[^book-css]

[^book-css]: The book's main body text [is colored](book.css) `#333`,

>     or roughly 97% black.

Reviewer: It is? 3/15 = 20%, no?

Author: Yeah, but then it's gamma corrected. I actually busted out the sRGB converter and checked. Perhaps I should say something like "97% black after gamma correction" and link "gamma correction" to the Wikipedia page?

Reviewer: SGTM
